- The Rainbow Mountain is one
of Peru's most iconic tourism sites.
- Rainbow Mountain, all to yourself.
- It is made for going viral.
- It's beautiful though. We did see it.
- Suddenly because of global tourism,
it became a symbol of violence.
Now somebody has been killed.
Money can do a lot of good.
It can really transform people's lives,
but it can also hurt them.
The Rainbow Mountain sits in
the southern Peruvian Andes,
the most impoverished part of the country.
One thing you realize when
you travel to the Andes
is that usually the center of power
of any indigenous community
will be the lowest
part of that mountain.
The higher you go, the
fewer things will grow
and the fewer opportunities you'll have.
- Rainbow Mountain.
- Maybe it was worth the hike. I think so.
- Peru is a mining nation.
Mining companies scout the Andes
because they're so rich in minerals.
And just as the Rainbow
Mountain is becoming known
to the world for the first time,
mining companies also get interested
and they buy mineral rights
to the area under it.
One of the most common struggles
with mining companies
is their relationship
with indigenous communities.
Many indigenous Peruvians
have been killed in protests
against mining, but the State
has always had a clear line.
If there are minerals under it,
we should try to extract them.
The Rainbow Mountain
got so big so quickly,
that the president himself
got involved to ensure
that the mountain would be preserved
and that it would not be
given to mining companies.
Saving a mountain from mining
in Peru is no small feat.
So really, when the mineral
rights were revoked,
people thought that tourism
would be this blessing for
the local community.
Because of Flavio's advocacy
for Rainbow Mountain,
he becomes president of the community
and the State is playing catch up.
And so there's a deal
reach between the community
and the local municipality
to split the revenue
from Rainbow Mountain.
And things appear to be in peace.
But the reality is they
are vying for power,
vying for control of ticket revenues.
There is no state support.
No programs meant to ensure
transparency.
There is nothing.
It is a situation where
a lot can go wrong,
and in this case it did.
While Flavio is a visionary at first,
he soon runs into obstacles
carrying out
this revenue split deal
with the municipality.
The community is suddenly
missing money,
and because of this, Flavio
finds himself in tension
with another community leader.
Cecilio Quispe Noa.
There are really two main
groups to this story.
On the one hand, you have
Chillihuani,
the normal center of
power of this community.
And on the other you have Llacto.
Cecilio becomes president
of the Chillihuani community
and he takes control of the ticket revenue
and he neglects the Llacto sector
and that brews resentment.
- Part of what makes
Rainbow Mountain a recipe
for disaster
is that there is no state
presence administering it.
And so these tensions about the handling
of the money continue to escalate,
and the very highest levels
of Peru's government
suddenly gets involved.
There is one thing that needs to be done.
The Rainbow Mountain
route needs to be shut down.
The communities meet on August 8th,
but at this point, tensions are sky high.
Cecilio attends this round table meeting
and he takes a very drastic position.
Cecilio says, we are
an indigenous community
and the State should not be
in any position to regulate,
oversee, or tax us.
And then he walks out
What Edit had been warning,
that there could be a fatal confrontation,
it is finally taking place.
She calls the police desperately.
Eventually, one police car
goes up to the town of Chillihuani
where they're met with the same mob
who throws stones at the
police car.
Feeling outnumbered they turned around.
There's absolute chaos.
But there's also a sense
of paralysis,
a sense of powerlessness.
A decision has been made,
and the decision is to wait until dawn
to do anything about this aggression.
The police report suggests that up
to 80 people made up this mob
that attacked and killed Flavio.
His body is found lying flat,
and he has bled from his skull.
He had died from blunt
trauma that was in line
with having been stoned to death.
These are neighbors.
These are people who have
lived together
their entire lifetimes,
and now the main witnesses are
Filomeno and his wife.
And they start naming names.
- One important tradition
in Andean communities is
to participate in local festivals.
After Flavio's killing
the Llacto community
decides they want to honor him
and do a reinterpretation
of his death in the form of a dance.
They're still hurting.
They're not able to freely
talk about what has happened
because they're in
conflict with one another.
And this dance, in a way, is
the only way for some people
to show what in their view has happened,
what the tragedy really looked like.
Since Flavio's killing, around 20 members
of the Chillihuani
community have been sent
to pre-trial detention in Peru.
Pre-trial detention can last years,
and it is possible that we
will just simply never know
who killed Flavio.
The realization is one of hopelessness.
How could this have happened?
How could a community have
gotten into such a situation
where they ended up killing each other?
How could money do something like that?